Create 1wf_06_database.md (#2077)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/guides/1wf_06_database.md

---
id: database
title: Database handling
description: >
  A guide to database handling in OCaml with the Caqti and ppx_rapper libraries
category: "Guides"
---

## Introduction

> The OCaml ecosystem provides multiple libraries which can be used to access a RDBMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OCaml ecosystem provides multiple libraries that can be used to access an RDBMS.
```

> One of these libraries is `caqti` which has multiple advantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of these libraries is `caqti`. It has the following features:
```

> - it can be used with multiple RDBMS (Postgres, MariaDB, SQLite3),
> - it can be used in a Lwt context which permits its use in some application server. Especially
> the Dream framework which has some specific functions which helps using Caqti,
> - it can be used with the `ppx_rapper` preprocessor. This preprocessor converts an annoted
> SQL query into a query function which leverage the strong typing feature of OCaml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It can be used with multiple RDBMS (Postgres, MariaDB, SQLite3).
- It can be used in a Lwt context. That permits use in some application servers. Especially the Dream framework, that has some dedicated functions that help using Caqti.
- It can be used with the `ppx_rapper` preprocessor. This preprocessor converts an annotated SQL query into a query function that leverages the strong typing feature of OCaml.
```

This tutorial is made to facilitate the integration of the multiple involved libraries.

> ## The Lwt and Lwt_result context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The Lwt and `Lwt_result` context
```

> `caqti` provides blocking functions which avoid the need of `lwt`, however one can use the `ppx_rapper`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`caqti` provides blocking functions, which avoid the need of `lwt`. However, one can use the `ppx_rapper`
```

preprocessor and produce Lwt promises, then some `lwt` integration is needed. Moreover `caqti` queries
return `Result` values which can be `Ok the_expected_result` or `Error the_error_description`.

> Chaining multiple queries may be cumbersome: testing the result value, extracting the
> "expected result" if Ok... The `Lwt_result` monad can make implicit each error test and
> result extraction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chaining multiple queries may be cumbersome: testing the result value and extracting the expected result if `Ok`. The `Lwt_result` monad can make implicit each error test and result extraction.
```

> The idea is instead of presenting the program like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea is instead of presenting the program like this:
```

```ocaml
let () =
  let result1 = query1 () in
  let result2 = query2 () in
  ...
```

> We present the program like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We present the program like that:
```

```ocaml
open Lwt_result.Syntax

let () =

>   match Lwt_main.run(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  match Lwt_main.run (
```

    let* result1 = query1 () in
    let* result2 = query2 () in
    Lwt.return (Result.Ok ()))
  with
  | Result.Ok () -> ...
  | Result.Error r -> ...
```

> The `let*` notation is associated to the `bind` function which deals with Lwt sequencing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `let*` notation is associated to the `bind` function, which deals with Lwt sequencing
```

> The `let*` notation is associated to the `bind` function which deals with Lwt sequencing
> (a `query1 ()` is typically of type `('a, 'b) result Lwt.t` which represent a computation
> which need to be scheduled). Once the query has been scheduled and executed, the `Result`
> value is analysed and the value of `Result.Ok value` is extracted. If the result is `Error err`,
> the thread of queries is aborted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `let*` notation is associated with the `bind` function that deals with Lwt sequencing. A `query1 ()` has often type `('a, 'b) result Lwt.t`, which represents a computation that needs to be scheduled. Once the query has been scheduled and executed, the `Result` value is tested. If the value is available in `Ok`, it is extracted. If the result is `Error`, the thread of queries is aborted.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the tutorials on [Monads](/docs/monads) and [operators](/docs/operators) for more on bind operators and custom lets operators.

```

> ## The database connection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The Database Connection
```

> `caqti` provides a `connect` function which establish a connection to the database, but it
> is more secure to use `with_connection` which garantee the closure of the database even in the
> presence of an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`caqti` provides a `connect` function that establishes a connection to the database. Still, it is more secure to use `with_connection`, which ensures the database's closure even in the presence of an error.
```

Then the following template should be used:

```ocaml
let () =
  match Lwt_main.run @@
    Caqti_lwt.with_connection(Uri.of_string "sqlite3:essai.sqlite")
      (function cnx ->
         ...

         Lwt.return (Result.Ok ())
      )
  with
  | Result.Ok () -> ...
  | Result.Error err -> ...
```

The following URIs are supported:

- `"sqlite3:filename"` (using sqlite3 library),
- `"postgresql://user:passwd@host/database"` (using postgresql library),
- `"pgx://user:passwd@host/database"` (using pgx library),
- `"mariadb://user:passwd@host/database"` (using mariadb library),

> ## Declaring and using queries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Declaring and Using Queries
```

> ### Default queries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Default Queries
```

The declaration of Caqti queries is rather complex. Hopefully, the `ppx_rapper` preprocessor
permits an easy composition of such queries.

The idea is to type something like this:

```ocaml
let query = [%rapper get_many {sql| SELECT @int{id}, @string?{value} FROM a

>                                     WHERE category = %string{category} |sql} ]  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                                    WHERE category = %string{category} |sql} ]
```

```

> `%type{name}` is used to indicate parameters which will be provided when calling the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`%type{name}` is used to indicate parameters that will be provided when calling the query.
```

> `@type{name}` is uses to indicate values (column names) which will be returned by the query.

Reviewer: To me, this hard to understand.

> `@type{name}` is uses to indicate values (column names) which will be returned by the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`@type{name}` is used to indicate values (column names), which will be returned by the query.
```

Types may be `int`, `int32`, `int64`, `string`, `octets`, `float`, `bool`, `pdate`,
`ptime_span` and `cdate` and `ctime` from `caqti-type-calendar`. A `?` like in this
example is used to return option values: `None` if the SQL value is `NULL`, `Some v`.

See [ppx_raper reference](https://github.com/roddyyaga/ppx_rapper) for defining custom types.

In order to execute the query, we have to type:

```ocaml
let* result = query ~category:"a category" cnx
```

With every input parameters as a labelled argument. If the query has no parameter (no
`%` values), `let* result = query () cnx` should be typed.

There are different types of queries. A `get_many` query (like the example) returns a list of
rows. `get_one` just returns the unique row, `get_opt` returns an option value (`None` or `Some`

> depending of the existance of a queried row), `execute` returns nothing `()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
depending on the existence of a queried row), `execute` returns nothing `()`.
```

> By default rows are presented as tuples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, rows are presented as tuples.
```

Is “presented” the right verb?

> ### ppx_rapper options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `ppx_rapper` Options
```

> Depending of the needs, a `ppx_rapper` query can be written as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the needs, a `ppx_rapper` query can be written as
```

```ocaml
  [%rapper get_many {sql|...|sql} options]
```

Where supported options are:

- `record_in` : instead of calling the query with one argument per parameter, a single

> argument is provided. It must be a record whose the fields correspond to the parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
argument is provided. It must be a record whose fields correspond to the parameters.
```

- `record_out` : instead of outputing row(s) as tuple(s), they are presented as record(s).
- `function_out` : the query is called with a function as its first argument. This function

> is called for each row with every values (column names) as a labelled arguments. The return value of the query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is called for each row with every value (column names) as a labelled argument. The return value of the query
```
This either needs to be
"every value" or just "values" 
as well as:
"a labelled argument" or "labelled arguments" (without the "a")

> is composed of the returned values of this function. This works like [List/Option.map].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is composed of the function's returned values. This works like [List/Option.map].
```

Options are separated by whitespaces.

> ## Custom error handling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Custom Error Handling
```

`(let*)` from `Lwt_result.Syntax` is handy if we want a default error
handling (stopping the chain of queries, returning an error type).

If we want our own error handling, we can use the `lwt_ppx` preprocessor and
use the `let%lwt` or `match%lwt` tokens.

Typically:

```ocaml
     match%lwt query_a () cnx with
     | Result.Ok _value -> do_something;
                  Lwt.return (Result.Ok ())
     | Result.Error err -> do_something;
                  Lwt.return (Result.Error err)
```

> Note: we can also change the `Lwt.return` values... An ok query could be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: we can also change the `Lwt.return` values... An acceptable query could be
```

> Note: we can also change the `Lwt.return` values... An ok query could be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: we can also change the `Lwt.return` values... An `Ok` query could be
```

> wrong if the returned values do not respect some assertions. An error query could also be mitigated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wrong if the returned values do not respect some assertions. An `Error` query could also be mitigated.
```
Should these match the code in capitalization?

If we want to embed the custom error handled query in the `(let*)` chain,
simply type:

```ocaml
 let* () = match%lwt ... in
```

> ## Itering a list of queries, transactions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Itering a List of Queries, Transactions
```

> Using `List.map` can easily create queries... but they won't be chained from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `List.map` creates queries that won't be chained from
```

> a `lwt` point of vue. The `Lwt_list.iter_s` and `Lwt_list.map_s` can iter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a `lwt` point of view. The `Lwt_list.iter_s` and `Lwt_list.map_s` can iter
```

them... but won't stop at the first error.

> If we wan't to iter all the queries even in the presence of error, we can
> simply type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to iter all the queries even in the presence of an error, we can
type
```

Reviewer 2: I'd also put a comma before "even"

```ocaml
let%lwt () = Lwt_list.iter_s  item_to_query_function list in
Lwt.return (Result.OK ())
```

Or

```ocaml
let%lwt result_list = Lwt_list.map_s item_to_query_function list in
analyse_the_result_list;
Lwt.return (Result.OK ())
```

But it would be better to define a function:

```ocaml
let iter_queries queries cnx =
   List.fold_left
     (fun a f -> Lwt_result.bind a (fun () -> f cnx))
     (Lwt.return (Ok ()))
     queries
```

> This function iter a list of functions with a connexion as an argument and execute each query.
> It can be used in the following context (where `insert_a_record` is defined in the example
> section):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function iters a list of functions with a connection as an argument and executes each query.
It can be used in the following context (where `insert_a_record` is defined in the example
section):
```

```ocaml
   let* () = iter_queries (List.map insert_a_record
           [ {id=78; text=Some "record78"};
             {id=142; text=Some "record142"};
             {id=42; text=Some "record78"} ]) cnx
   in
   ...
```

This iteration stops at the first error and returns this error.

A transaction (a rollback is executed at the first error) can be defined by the following
function (which needs the `lwt_ppx` preprocessor):

```ocaml
let transaction queries cnx =
  let module Connection = (val cnx : Caqti_lwt.CONNECTION) in
  let* () = Connection.start () in
  match%lwt iter_queries queries cnx with
  |  Ok () -> Connection.commit ()
  |  Error e -> let%lwt _ = Connection.rollback () in
                  Lwt.return (Error e)
```

The `transaction` function is used in the same way as `iter_queries`.

## Example

> The following example is a working program which illustrates the use of the different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example is a working program that illustrates the use of the different
```
